How to Securely Delegate Access From Humans to
AI Agents
20 August 2025 - ID G00833731 - 11 min read
By: Nathan Harris, Akif Khan
Initiatives:Identity and Access Management; Build and Optimize Cybersecurity Programs

     Credential sharing when AI agents act on behalf of humans in both
     workforce and customer context exposes organizations to very
     high risk. IAM-focused cybersecurity leaders should prohibit this
     practice and provide access delegation capabilities within the IAM
     toolset to enable this use case.


Overview
Key Findings
■      Some companies have deployed AI agents that ask a human for their personal
       credentials in order to act on the human’s behalf, which substantially increases risk,
       including account takeover (ATO) risk.

■      Access delegation capabilities already exist in some access management (AM)
       tools, and are successfully used for human-to-human delegation.

■      The release of general-purpose AI agents by companies such as Anthropic and
       OpenAI means that AI agents, acting on behalf of customers, can engage with
       enterprise services.


Recommendations
Cybersecurity leaders focused on machine identity and access management (IAM) for AI
agents should:

■      Avoid the risks, increase in security incidents, and likely legal liability by prohibiting
       credential sharing, including from humans to AI agents.

■      Enable access delegation from humans to AI agents, by implementing access
       delegation capability, starting with what is available from incumbent AM vendors.




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                                Page 1 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
■      Educate business leaders by explaining the risks created by allowing customers to
       use third-party AI agents and the compromises that may be required to balance
       security with customer engagement.


Strategic Planning Assumptions
By 2028, 90% of organizations that allow humans to share credentials with AI agents will
have to make signiﬁcant investment to undo this design due to security and compliance
issues.


By 2028, 90% of digital commerce organizations that allow humans to share credentials
with AI agents will have experienced a tripling in ATO and ﬁrst-party fraud.


Introduction
Many organizations across all industries are ramping up AI application development,
including expanding GenAI capabilities to develop and implement AI agents. In a subset
of use cases (see Note 1), mostly in consumer-facing digital business, there is potential
value in enabling AI agents to act on behalf of a named individual. There are two
technical approaches to enable this:

■      Code the AI agent to ask the human for their authentication credentials and use
       these to access back-end applications.

■      Provide a way for a human to delegate their access within back-end applications to
       the AI agent they are authorizing to act on their behalf.


Some AI-related protocols, such as Model Context Protocol (MCP), actually enable
credential sharing.



However, credential sharing in any form substantially increases risk, including likelihood
of data breaches, ﬁnancial loss and other incidents, and possible legal liability, and breaks
the integrity of audit data (misattributes actions in back-end systems) and nonrepudiation
mechanisms.



How can IAM leaders enable access delegation from humans to agentic AI applications
while avoiding the extreme risk associated with credential sharing?




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                               Page 2 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
IAM leaders should direct their teams to implement leading access delegation
features/capabilities, utilizing the guidance in this research note, and apply these
advanced capabilities to the relevant agentic AI use cases.


Analysis
Credential Sharing Is a Hazardous Approach. Don’t Implement It.
The cheapest and fastest way to implement human-to-AI agent access delegation is
credential sharing (having the agent ask the human for their credentials for the target
applications it needs access to).



Credential sharing is an exceptionally (we use this term intentionally) high-risk method for
enabling AI agents to act on behalf of humans, and it is inconsistently effective.



Credential sharing comes with multiple increased risks:

■      Breaks audit trail integrity in back-end systems, as most systems don’t understand
       impersonation natively, so will create log data indicating the human performed
       transactions actually executed by an AI agent.

■      Violates a fundamental cyberSecurity principle — unique identiﬁcation of all actors.

■      Breaks nonrepudiation, handing involved humans a legally defensible repudiation
       option: “the machine did it, not me.”

■      For customer ﬁnancial transactions, this also opens the door to ﬁnancial transaction
       repudiation: “I didn’t authorize this transaction; the AI agent did it without my
       authorization.” This increases ﬁnancial risk substantially for any transaction with
       costs.

■      Increases business disruption, as revoking or blocking credentials for an agent
       would result in blocking access for the human also.

■      Promoting this for human-to-agent machine delegation will reduce the effectiveness
       of all other anti-credential sharing security awareness campaigns and potentially
       undermine the enforceability of security policies.


Best practice is to actively discourage credential sharing. Encouraging this for human-to-
agent delegation implies that the machines are more inherently trustworthy, which is not
the case.

Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                              Page 3 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
In addition to the risks involved, credential sharing will not work in some cases. Some
authentication credential types are inherently not shareable, including biometric traits and
FIDO2 passkeys.


In conclusion, credential sharing is both an exceptionally high-risk practice and not
workable for some authentication methods. IT leaders implementing AI agents to act on
behalf of humans should prohibit credential sharing to enable this.


Enable Secure Access Delegation for AI Agents
Access delegation capabilities enable human-to-AI agent delegation use cases securely.
There are multiple design options that can accomplish this, and one overarching
requirement:

Segregation of duties: First, those involved should eliminate/prohibit one design option:
allowing the agentic AI software itself to manage what it is authorized to do on behalf of
humans. This violates segregation of duties and will not pass any audit. Involved IT
leaders should implement access delegation controls within the scope of control of
organizations hosting resources/apps to be accessed by agentic AI, using one of the two
below paths.


Viable access delegation paths: There are two viable design/implementation paths for
access delegation:


Option A: Use vendor AM tools — Utilize access delegation capabilities available in your
incumbent AM/CIAM tool (see Note 2):

■      Some AM tools already support this for human-to-human delegation use cases,
       common in insurance, healthcare, legal, ﬁnancial services and education industries.

■      This capability is already largely supported in OAuth for API interactions, and a few
       AM vendors have built out the necessary interfaces and management capabilities
       for full functionality.

■      Most organizations prefer one AM solution for both UI and API interactions,
       including buying one AM tool for both UI layer and API layer access control.




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                             Page 4 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
■      If your current AM/CIAM vendor does not adequately support access delegation
       ﬂows, IAM leaders should either:

       ■      Evaluate and select a supplemental AM or authorization tool to ﬁll in the
              missing capability, or

       ■      Reevaluate their incumbent AM/CIAM tooling’s long-term suitability for their
              organization’s requirements.


Option B: Build — If IAM leaders chose to build this in-house, here are the minimum
requirements:

■      Build as a shared service along with other authorization functions, and reuse this
       shared service wherever needed in your digital business architecture. For detailed
       guidance on authorization architecture, see Guidance for Modernizing Authorization
       Architecture.

■      The component must also allow easy revocation of delegation. The ability to grant
       authorization for an agent to act on the human’s behalf without the reciprocal ability
       to revoke this authorization removes full discretion for this decision from the
       involved people.

■      Access delegation must support ﬂexible scope and constraints; it should not be “all
       or nothing” access authorization to back-end systems or datasets. Delegation
       should be limited to purpose, breadth of function, and ideally, ability to time-limit
       access delegation authorization.

■      This cannot be built into and controlled by the AI agents (as stated above).

■      Access delegation should not be built into back-end applications, as this creates
       unnecessary complexity and high ongoing costs. One exception is for organizations
       with a single client-facing portal that “front-ends” all client-facing digital business. In
       this case, integrating access delegation into the sole customer-facing portal may be
       justiﬁed in the short term. However, implementing authorization, including access
       delegation capability, as a reusable shared service still delivers superior technology
       agility and long-term sustainability.




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                               Page 5 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
For UI interactions by dedicated (not-embedded) AI agents, IAM leaders and other involved
IT leaders should decide between the two paths above for enabling these use cases
(human-to-AI agent delegation). For API-enabled interactions, implement OAuth delegated
access ﬂows using the API access control reference architecture (see Reference
Architecture Brief: API Access Control).

For Agentic AI features embedded in broader applications:


IAM leaders should still apply all of the other guidance in this research note whenever the
embedded agent is accessing resources or data outside of the application it is embedded
in. However, for actions entirely within an application with embedded agentic AI features,
the authentication and authorization architecture, including the use or not of shared
access management tooling, directly constrains what is possible for the embedded
agentic AI features. Speciﬁcally, it is very unlikely that the embedded agent functionality
will have a separate identity record or authentication credentials from the broader
application. This is not, by itself, a critical security issue.

For this AI agent implementation pattern, traceability of accountability and preservation of
nonrepudiation are still critical requirements. IAM leaders and other involved IT leaders
should implement this pattern with the following requirements/capabilities:

■      Provide for human-to-application (the entire business application, including
       embedded agentic AI functions) access delegation using either Path A or Path B
       above.

■      Ensure that 100% of actions executed by agentic AI functions rather than directly by
       the human are attributable to the application on behalf of the human, rather than
       appearing to be executed by the human directly. This preserves auditability and
       nonrepudiation.


Engage Digital Business Leaders With a Plan for Enabling AI Agents Acting
on Behalf of Your Customers
Many customer-facing organizations are building (or buying) and deploying their own AI
agents to help their customers to carry out tasks. Deployed in industries such as digital
commerce and insurance, these agents can answer customer questions, suggest
products, and support purchasing. In these cases, IAM leaders can enforce appropriate
access delegation approaches as outlined in this research.




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                          Page 6 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
However, the proliferation of general-purpose AI agents, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT agent
or Anthropic’s Claude, means that an organization must be prepared for customers to use
these agents, rather than its own, to engage with its services.

Given that these agents are not under your control, it is not possible to restrict customers
from sharing their own credentials with the agents. IAM leaders should engage with
business leaders to explain the complexities of this environment and the two key
approaches that require consideration:

■      Restrict customers to using only your native AI agents — This approach prioritizes
       security, but may come at the expense of frustrated customers who are attempting
       to use third-party AI agents to engage with your services but ﬁnd themselves unable
       to do so. Customers will be forced to follow your workﬂow for access delegation to
       your agent. Of course, this is dependent on IAM leaders deploying tools that can
       identify whether a customer is using a third-party agent and attempt to block its use.
       Bot management vendors that have traditionally been used to block malicious
       scripted bots used by attackers for credential stufﬁng or inventory grabbing are
       evolving their capabilities to include detection and blocking of AI agents (see How to
       Use Bot Management for IAM Use Cases), but this is likely to result in both false
       positives and false negatives, with some humans being misidentiﬁed as AI agents
       and some AI agents being misidentiﬁed as humans.


■      Allow customers to use third-party AI agents — This approach prioritizes customer
       engagement, giving customers the ﬂexibility to use your agents or third-party agents
       of their choosing. This approach attempts to ﬁnd a middle ground, allowing
       customers to use third-party agents, but only if they use access delegation as you
       prescribe. Where a third-party agent is detected using a human’s credentials, it would
       be blocked. If a business decision is made to permit access to a third-party agent
       using human credentials, this opens up risks related to fraudulent impersonation of
       a customer and nonrepudiation — as such, the costs of these should be factored into
       the decision process of permitting this risky behavior.


Whichever option is chosen, IAM leaders should inform and educate a number of business
counterparts:

■      Legal teams — Customer-facing terms and conditions will need adjusting,
       speciﬁcally with respect to a customer’s right to report fraud or dispute a purchase
       when an agent is involved.



Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                           Page 7 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
■      Marketing/communications teams — Clearly communicate to customers how AI
       agents will be permitted to engage with your services.

■      Digital commerce teams — Ensure business leaders understand the different
       approaches so they can balance security and customer engagement effectively.


Evidence
This research is based on client inquiry on this topic in addition to previously published
Gartner research noted in the Recommended Reading.


Note 1: Most Common AI Agent Use Cases
The most common use cases for AI agents acting on behalf of speciﬁc humans will be in
consumer use of commercial digital services. Likely examples include AI agents for:

■      Assisting with travel booking and trip itinerary planning

■      Assisting with insurance plan selection and enrollment during open enrollment
       periods

■      Completing online forms in various industries, including government agencies

■      In service desk scenarios, automating the opening of support requests/tickets (all
       industries)

■      Basic medical/care management tasks, such as scheduling routine appointments
       and requesting prescription reﬁlls

■      Finding and automating applications for job openings that ﬁt an applicant’s
       speciﬁcations

■      Completing course registration processes in higher education


Note 2: Vendors With Known Strong Access Delegation
Capabilities
Some representative access management vendors with known strong access delegation
capabilities that do not rely on AI agent reuse of human access credentials/tokens
include:

■      IBM


Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                          Page 8 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
■      Ping Identity

■      Transmit Security




Recommended by the Authors
Some documents may not be available as part of your current Gartner subscription.

Critical Capabilities for Access Management
How to Use Bot Management for IAM Use Cases

How to Secure Custom-Built AI Agents




© 2025 Gartner, Inc. and/or its afﬁliates. All rights reserved. Gartner is a registered trademark of
Gartner, Inc. and its afﬁliates. This publication may not be reproduced or distributed in any form
without Gartner's prior written permission. It consists of the opinions of Gartner's research
organization, which should not be construed as statements of fact. While the information contained in
this publication has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, Gartner disclaims all warranties
as to the accuracy, completeness or adequacy of such information. Although Gartner research may
address legal and ﬁnancial issues, Gartner does not provide legal or investment advice and its research
should not be construed or used as such. Your access and use of this publication are governed by
Gartner's Usage Policy. Gartner prides itself on its reputation for independence and objectivity. Its
research is produced independently by its research organization without input or inﬂuence from any
third party. For further information, see "Guiding Principles on Independence and Objectivity." Gartner
research may not be used as input into or for the training or development of generative artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning, algorithms, software, or related technologies.




Gartner, Inc. | G00833731                                                                       Page 9 of 9


This research note is restricted to the personal use of NIV@LINXSECURITY.IO.
